:doctype: book
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:toc: macro
:toc-title: Table of contents
:toclevels: 5

:toc-position: left

:appendix-caption: Annex

:numbered:
:sectanchors:
:sectnumlevels: 5
:nofooter:

[[Common_Transformer_Functionality]]
= Common Transformer Functionality

The execution of a transformer (e.g. identity and profiler
transformation) can include invocation of common pre- and/or
postprocessing functionality. A transformer may also explicitly define
the schemas that it processes.

The following sections describe which common functionality is available
and define how to configure it.

[[Preprocessing]]
== Preprocessing

Preprocessing functionality is executed on a model right before the
transformer specific processing (e.g. profiling) is invoked.

Currently no specific common preprocessing functionality is available.

[[Postprocessing]]
== Postprocessing

Postprocessing functionality is executed on a model right after the
transformer specific processing (e.g. profiling) has been completed.

[[Setting_Tagged_Values]]
=== Setting Tagged Values

[[Setting_Tagged_Values_Overview]]
==== Overview

This function supports setting and re-setting of tagged values for model
elements after a transformation.

Filter instructions support the identification of model elements for
which a tagged value is to be (re-)set.

It is possible to add a tagged value to a model element without
providing an actual value in the configuration. In that case ShapeChange
determines if the tagged value already exists. If so, the existing value
is kept. Otherwise the tagged value is initialized with the empty
string. If the configuration contains a value for the tagged value, it
is set.

[[Setting_Tagged_Values_Configuration]]
==== Configuration

In order to configure which tagged values to set after a specific
transformer has been completed, add a <taggedValues> element as child to
the <Transformer> element in the ShapeChangeConfiguration. Within the
<taggedValues> element, add one or more <TaggedValue> elements, with the
information items described in the following sections.

[[Name]]
===== Name

Type: string

Explanation: Name of the tagged value to (re-)set.

Required / optional: required

Default value: _none_

[[Value]]
===== Value

Type: string

Explanation: Value of the tagged value.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none_

[[Model_element_filter_criteria]]
===== Model element filter criteria

The attributes described in the following sections represent filter
criteria to select relevant model elements. The filter criteria are
connected by an implicit AND. If all filters evaluate to true, the model
element is a relevant one, i.e. in this case the <TaggedValue> element
applies to it.

NOTE: Only model elements from the schemas selected for processing are
considered. Furthermore, non-navigable properties are ignored.

[[Model_element_name]]
====== Model element name

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If the name of a given model element matches the regular
expression, this filter criterium evaluates to true.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Model_element_type]]
====== Model element type

Type: string â€“ one of:

* Association
* Class
* Package
* Property
* Attribute
* AssociationRole

Explanation: If the model element is of the stated type, this filter
criterium evaluates to true.

NOTE: Using 'Property', the filter will evaluate to true for both
attributes and association roles.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Model_element_stereotype]]
====== Model element stereotype

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If one of the stereotypes of a given model element matches
the regular expression, this filter criterium evaluates to true.

NOTE: Stereotypes are recognized via their well-known form only, not via
their aliases (see
xref:../application schemas/UML_profile.adoc#Stereotypes[ShapeChange
Stereotypes] for further information). The regular expression must be
defined accordingly. Also note that this filter criterium does not
support a combined check of multiple stereotypes (e.g. to ensure that a
model element has both stereotype A and B).

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Model_element_owner_name]]
====== Model element owner name

(since v2.4.0)

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If the name of the owner of the given model element matches
the regular expression, this filter criterium evaluates to true.

The filter only applies to model elements that (can) have an owner:

* The owner of a property is the class to which the property belongs.
* The owner of class is the package that contains it.
* The owner of a package is the package that contains it.

If a model element has no owner (the element is an association or root
package), the filter automatically evaluates to true.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Model_element_owner_stereotype]]
====== Model element owner stereotype

(since v2.11.0)

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If a stereotype of the owner of the given model element
matches the regular expression, this filter criterium evaluates to true.

The filter only applies to model elements that (can) have an owner:

* The owner of a property is the class to which the property belongs.
* The owner of class is the package that contains it.
* The owner of a package is the package that contains it.

If a model element has no owner (the element is an association or root
package), the filter automatically evaluates to true.

NOTE: Stereotypes are recognized via their well-known form only, not via
their aliases (see
xref:../application schemas/UML_profile.adoc#Stereotypes[ShapeChange
Stereotypes] for further information). The regular expression must be
defined accordingly. Also note that this filter criterium does not
support a combined check of multiple stereotypes (e.g. to ensure that a
model element has both stereotype A and B).

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Property_value_type_stereotype]]
====== Property value type stereotype

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If the given model element is a property and one of the
stereotypes of the value type of the property matches the regular
expression, this filter criterium evaluates to true. If the model
element is not a property, the filter automatically evaluates to true.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Property_value_type_name]]
====== Property value type name

(since v2.14.0)

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If the given model element is a property and the
name of the value type of the property matches the regular
expression, this filter criterium evaluates to true. If the model
element is not a property, the filter automatically evaluates to true.
Attributes that do not have a value type (e.g., enums and codes) are ignored.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Application_schema_name]]
====== Application schema name

Type: string with regular expression (using the
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Pattern.html[syntax
supported by Java])

Explanation: If the name of the application schema that a given model
element belongs to matches the regular expression, this filter criterium
evaluates to true. This criterium is useful in case that processing
shall only be applied to model elements within a specific application
schema.

NOTE: If the model element type is association, then the application
schema name filter will be matched if the name of the application schema
of (at least) one of the classes at the association ends or - if it
exists - the association class matches the regular expression.

Required / optional: optional

Default value: _none - the model element is assumed to match this
filter_

[[Setting_Tagged_Values_Example]]
==== Example

Setting of the following tagged values adds information about the DGIWG
Spatial Profile implemented by the MyAppSchema application schema to the
model. More specifically, the tagged values are set on the package with
(normalized) stereotype "application schema" and name "MyAppSchema".

[source,xml,linenumbers]
----------
<taggedValues>
 <TaggedValue name="dgiwgComplianceLevel" value="L1_3D" modelElementStereotype="(?i:application schema)" modelElementName="MyAppSchema"/>
 <TaggedValue name="dgiwgGMLProfileSchema" value="http://schemas.dgiwg.org/gml/3.2/spatial/1.0/3dGeometry.xsd" modelElementStereotype="(?i:application schema)" modelElementName="MyAppSchema"/>
</taggedValues>
----------

[[Setting_Model_Generation_Date_and_Time]]
=== Setting Model Generation Date and Time

[[Setting_Model_Generation_Date_and_Time-Overview]]
==== Overview

The time that a model has been transformed by ShapeChange can be added
to the model.

More specifically, ShapeChange adds the "generationDateTime" tagged
value for each selected application schema (selection can be controlled
via parameters on the <input> configuration element, e.g. the paramter
appSchemaName - see the
xref:../get started/The_element_input.adoc["input" element
documentation] for further information). The value is a time instant in
UTC with the format: yyyy-MM-dd'T'HH:mm:ss'Z'.

[[Setting_Model_Generation_Date_and_Time-Configuration]]
==== Configuration

In order to configure this functionality, simply add a
<ProcessParameter> element to the configuration of a transformer, with
the attribute "name" set to "setGenerationDateTimeTaggedValue" and the
attribute "value" set to "true".

[[Setting_Model_Generation_Date_and_Time-Example]]
==== Example

[source,xml,linenumbers]
----------
<parameters>
Â Â  Â <ProcessParameter name="setGenerationDateTimeTaggedValue" value="true"/>
</parameters>
----------

[[Parsing_and_Validating_Constraints]]
=== Parsing and Validating Constraints

(since v2.2.0)

A model transformation (for example profiling) can modify the model in
such a way that constraints - especially OCL and FOL constraints - are
no longer valid. By default, ShapeChange parses and validates
constraints when postprocessing a transformed model.

Invalid constraints are converted into simple text constraints, so that
processing can proceed. However, warnings in the log will identify
invalid constraints (together with the reason why they are invalid). The
user can then either modify the input model (e.g. constraint
definitions), the transformations (e.g. profiling), or the output (if
there were only minor issues).

Parsing and validating constraints of a transformed model can help
prevent errors.

However, the functionality can also be skipped by including
_rule-trf-all-postprocess-skip-constraint-validation_ in the rules of a
particular transformation. This can be useful if constraints of
transformed models are irrelevant for target processing (i.e., the
derivation of the final output).

(since v2.10.0)

By default, the ShapeChange OCL parser does not support navigating
across non-navigable association roles, which is an optional feature
according to the OCL standard. By setting the value of the
_navigatingNonNavigableAssociationsWhenParsingOcl_ parameter to true,
navigation across non-navigable association roles while parsing OCL
during a transformation - or when an internal copy of the input model is
created for the transformation - is enabled.

[[Selecting_the_Schemas_to_Process]]
== Selecting the Schemas to Process

(since v2.6.0)

When processing a model, the default behavior of ShapeChange is to
process all schemas contained in that model. The typical use case,
however, is that a specific (set of) application schema(s) shall be
processed, and that other schemas - like the ISO schemas â€“ merely
provide type definitions. The following configuration parameters are
used to select the set of schemas to process:
xref:../get started/The_element_input.adoc#appSchemaName[_appSchemaName_],
xref:../get started/The_element_input.adoc#appSchemaNameRegex[_appSchemaNameRegex_],
and
xref:../get started/The_element_input.adoc#appSchemaNamespaceRegex[_appSchemaNamespaceRegex_].
They are typically set in the input configuration, and that is the
default place for ShapeChange to look for them. However, a transformer
configuration can also define one or more of these parameters. If it
does, then ShapeChange will use the parameters from the transformer
configuration, rather than the input configuration, to select the
schemas to be processed by the transformer.
